When a driver doesn’t get proper rest, they fall asleep while driving and this leads to fatal 
accident. This particular issue demands a solution in the form of a system that is capable of 
detecting drowsiness and to take necessary actions to avoid accidents. This report explains the 
final project, driver drowsiness detection system. 
 Accidents due to sleep deprivation is a common problem all around the world.A micro 
sleep is something we all may have experienced at least once in our life, where we momentarily 
fall asleep and then immediately awake up. And it is a very common thing among vehicle 
drivers, they fall asleep and awake up immediately and continue with their previous activity 
and it will not be an issue as long as it is a straight road and there is no vehicle ahead of them 
or behind them but at the same time if the driver is driving along a curve or the motor vehicle 
ahead of the driver is applying sudden brake then the reflex action by the driver will not be fast 
enough to take appropriate action and mostly result in an accident.Driver drowsiness is one of 
the main causes of road accidents around the world. Even though there are many road safety 
products designed to prevent road accidents due to driver drowsiness.
 Road accidents have been a major cause for concern across the Indian subcontinent .In 
2019 alone, the country reported over 151 thousand fatalities due to road accidents. Each year, 
about three to five percent of the country’s GDP was invested in road accidents. Notably, while 
India has about one percent of the world’s vehicle population, it also accounted for about six 
percent of the global road traffic incidents. Almost 70 percent of the accidents involved young 
Indians.
India is one of the busiest countries in the world in terms of road traffic. 40% of highway 
accidents occur due to drivers dozing off Exhausted drivers who doze off at the wheel are 
responsible for about 40% of road accidents, says a study by the Central Road Research 
Institute (CRRI) . This number of accidents that INDIA is facing now days is very big number 
. many of lives in India are loosing due to this situation .
 In recent years, driver drowsiness has been one of the major causes of road accidents 
and can lead to severe physical injuries, deaths and significant economic losses. Statistics 
indicate the need of a reliable driver drowsiness detection system which could alert the driver 
before a mishap happens. According to available statistical data, over 1.3 million people die 
each year on the road and 20 to 50 million people suffer non-fatal injuries due to road accidents
[1]. Based on police reports, the US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) conservatively estimated that a total of 100,000 vehicle crashes each year are the 
direct result of driver drowsiness. These crashes resulted in approximately 1,550 deaths, 71,000 
injuries and $12.5 billion in monetary losses 
[2]. In the year 2009, the US National Sleep Foundation (NSF) reported that 54% of adult 
drivers have driven a vehicle while feeling drowsy and 28% of them actually fell asleep
[3]. The German Road Safety Council (DVR) claims that one in four highway traffic fatalities 
are a result of momentary driver drowsiness
[4]. These statistics suggest that driver drowsiness is one of the main causes of road accident.
